# CS23820 2016-17 Exam 
## Past Paper Practice 

### Question 1: "Linked data structures in ANSI C and related memory problems."

> a) (i) Describe how a binary tree can be implemented using pointers and structures in ANSI C. Asume each node of your tree is required to hold a numberic key (assume this is a whole number) as well as other data appropriate to the task for which the tree is being constructed. Provide details of the data strcutures that you would use [9 Marks]

- A binary tree is a tree data structure that satisfies the condition: each node has at most two children, the left child and the right child. 
- Each node can be declared as a `struct` in ANSI C in the following way: 

```c 
typedef struct node {
    int data; //numeric key.
    struct node* left; //pointer to lc.
    struct node* right; //pointer to rc.
} node;
```

> a) (ii) Outline how a new node would be added into the tree. Assume that the value of the key field determines whether the new item is added on the left branch (if the new item has a lower key value) or the right branch (if the new item has a higher key value). (You may give your answer using real C code, pseudo-code or a textual description accompanied by diagrams.) [12 Marks]

>b) (i) Describe what is meant by a memory leak in a C program. Relate your answer to typical operations on binary tree structures such as those you have descrbied in part a of this question. [6 Marks] 

- Memory leaks occur when a programmer allocated memory, use said memeory, and then forget to deallocate that memory, thus reducing the total amount of memory available to the subsequent sections of the program when they run. 

- If memory is not managed properly, a single program could exhaust the total available system memory as the application runs.

- In the context of implementing a binary tree, if memory is allocated during node creation, but never deallocated during node deletion, the tree could theoretically be very small after a series of node deletion, but in practice use a large amount of system memory due to the programmer not taking memory management seriously.

>b) (ii) Why are memory leaks a particular problem in C programming? [6 Marks]

- In C, the programmer has to manually manage memory as there is no "garbage collection" feature inherintely built into the language. 

- `malloc()` is a standard C function for allocating memory and `free()` is a standard C function to dispose of memory no longer needed that was created through `malloc()`. 

### Question 2: "This question concerns features of C introduced by the ANSI standards and traps and pitfalls that await the unwary C programmer."

> a) Describe the syntax for function declaration (please note, this says declaration and not definition), normally known as function prototypes in ANSI C. Why is this regarded as an improvement over the syntax previously used in Kernighan and Ritchie (K&R) C and how do compilers use this? [8 Marks] 

- A function declaration gives the compiler information about a function's name and how to call it. The body of the function is defined in a function definition. The function syntax for function declarations is as follows:

```c
return_type function_name(param_type param);
```

- It is worth noting that param. names are not needed in C, only the param. type. Function declarations, by convention, are declared at the top of the file calling the function. 

- ANSI C function declarations are superior to K&R C function declarations as in the old style there is no parameter checking in the function declaration. C did not offer full function prototypes in the early K&R C versions.

> b) Before the arrival of C99, programmers were obliged to define all arrays with fixed sizes that were known at compile time. Describe how programmers managed to create and access structures that behaved like arrays but whose sizes were not known until runtime and provide some typical code. [9 Marks]

- Versions of ANSI C before C99 did not have an implementation for Dynamic Arrays. If a programmer is writing C code to conform with the C89/90 standard and compile said code, the compiler will issues various errors such as `ISO C90 forbids variable length array...`

- An eqivalent work-around to dynamic arrays in C89 is as follows: 

```c
s = malloc(n); //Requests an area of n bytes and sets s to point at it. 

float *f;

f = malloc(100 * sizeof(float)); //malloc returns NULL if a failure occours.
```

- This can also be achieved with a function, the function prototype of which is: 

```c
void* calloc(size_t n, size_t el_size);
f = calloc (100, sizeof(float)); //Allocates spaces and sets them all the zero.
void free (void * ptr) //Releasing space allocated by malloc like this.
free*(f); //Or like this. 
```

> c) There are various situations where C programs might not act in th way the programmer inteded. In each other the following examples, explain the behaviour of the code segment and why it may not be what was inteded. [4 Marks for each subpart]

> c) (i) 
>```c 
>double j;
>j = 9.0 /2.0;
>if (j = 4.5) printf("9.0 divided 2.0 equals 4.5\n");
>```

- Declares a variable, `j`, of type double.  

> c) (ii)
> ```c
> int i;
> i = 9;
> if (i >< 5);
>   printf("i is not equal to 5\n");
>```


> c) (iii)
> ```c
> int index;
> int myarray[40];
> index = 20;
> myarray[index] = index ++;
>```


> c) (iv)
> ```c
> int p, q;
> /* now some code, not shown here, to set p and then... */
> switch (p){
>    option 1: q = 33; break;
>    option 3; q = 66; break;
>    option 4; q = 23;
>    default: q = 66;
>}
>```

### Question 3: "This question concerns C++ memory allocation ,parameter passing, overlaoded operators, and constructors."

> a) Consider the following declarations of the variable `newStock`. Assuming correct implementation of the Vehicle class, explain what each of these lines of code achieves, concentrating on issues such as memory allocation, object initialisation, access mechanisms, and object lifetime. [14 Marks]  
> a) (i) `Vehicle newStock;`  

- Creates a variable `newStock` of type Vehicle. 

> a) (ii) `Vehicle* newStock;`  

- Creates a pointer to variable called `newStock`. 
 
> a) (ii) `Vehicle newStock = Vehicle(12736, "Acme Ltd);`

- Creates a new `Vehicle` object called `newStock` and passes in some parameters such the vehicle number and the car brand. 

> a) (iv) `Vehicle* newStock = new Vehicle;`   
> a) (v) `Vehicle newStock[5];`   
> a) (vi) `Vehicle* newStock = new Vehicle(12736, "Acme Ltd);`     
> a) (vii) `Vehicle* newStock = new Vehicle[5];` 
 

 > b) The following function defintion appears in some code you need to understand: 
 >```c
 > /*!
 >  * \brief calculate the dues based on age and time served etc.
 >  */
 > virtual double Club::calcAnnualFees(
 >    const Member &member){
 >    ...
 >}
 >```
 > b) (i) What is the significance of the `&` in the type specifier? [2 Marks]  
 > b) (ii) What is the significane of the `const` specifier? [2 Marks]  
 > b) (iii) Under what circumstances would it make sense to use both the `const` and `&` type specifiers? [3 Marks]  
 > b) (iv) Leaving out both the `const` and the `&` specifiers appears to the calling function to produce the same behaviour. What is the difference? [4 Marks]

 > c) Consider the following class definition (line numbers only for reference).
 >```c
 >1 class Circle{
 >2    public:
 >3        Circle(const Circle &);    
 >4        ~Circle();
 >5        void draw(void);
 >6        //other public data and function members...
 >7     private: 
 >8         Vertex * center;
 >9        //other private data and function memebers...
 >10    }
 >```
 > c) (i) What functionality would you expect the implementation of the copy constructor declared on line 3 to provide? [4 Marks]
 > c) (ii) Write the code required for the implementation of the copy constrcutor as it would appear in the `Circle.cpp` file given the class declaration provided. The exact syntax is not required. [4 Marks]

 ### Question 4: "This question concerns inheritance and templates in C++"

 > a) Briefly explain the concept of multiple inheritance in C++. Include in your discussion potential issues that can arise from the use of multiple inheritance and how they can be addressed. [9 Marks]

 - Multiple inheritance is when a class inherits member functions from a base class through more than one different intermediary class. 
 - A class, for example one called `D` can inherit its member function and data members from the `A` class through two different classes one level up in the hierarchy called `B` and `C`
- A common problem is the diamond problem, that is, if there is a member function in the `A` class that `B` and `C` have overridden but that the `D` class hasn't overridden, which version of the member function does `D` inherit, the member function from `B` or the one from `C`? 
- A solution to this problem is that we can use virtual class inheritance to solve the problem. In this situation, `B` and `C` **don't** have their own inherited member function from `A`, rahter they **defer** to the single base class `A` when the method is called from `D`. 

 > b) C++ allows the programmer to explicitly control polymorphism.

 > b) (i) Explain the significance of the difference between polymorphic and non-polymorphic member functions from the programmer's perspective. [4 Marks]

 > b) (ii) Outline the significant differences between polymorphic and non-polymorphic member functions from the perspective of the run time execution behaviour. [3 Marks]

 > b) (iii) What effect does multiple inheritance have on polymorphism? [3 Marks]

 > c) Explain the concept of templates as defined in the C++ language. Be sure to differentiate between what the programmer does and waht the compiler does. [4 Marks]

 - Templates in C++ allows the programmer to creat functions and classes that operate with generic types; these entities work on different data types without each function/class being rewritten for each data type the program operates on. 

 > d) Explain the expression operator overloading. [2 Marks]  

 - Operator overloading is sometimes called "ad hoc polymorphism". Different operators have different implementations depeneding on their arguments. Operator overloading is a form of syntactic sugar. Operator overloading allows programmers ot reassign the semantics of operators depending on the types of their operands. 

 > e) Operator overloading is an important concept for classes to be used as template parameters. Explain, using examples, a situation when member operators need to be overloaded and a situation when global operators need to be overloaded. [4 Marks]

 > f) What are the advantages of creating a tempalte? Differentiate between when you would use templates and when inheritance would be appropriate. [4 Marks]

 - Templates are code generation tools whereas inheritance provides runtime abstraction. 

